In the last lecture we added auto-logout,
now I want to make sure that if I do login here and then I reload the page, I still am logged in because
the token here, it still would be valid.
Now to do this, I first of all need to store the token somewhere else than in the vuex store because
the vuex store of course is javascript and therefore is lost just as all the other data in javascript files
is on page reloads.
We can use a browser API,
we can use local storage, local storage can be accessed from within the browser,
it's not a vue feature which allows us to store key value pairs in a persistent browser storage.
So on local storage, I can call set item and I can give it any key I want like token and there, I can
now store res data ID token.
The same could be done for the user id, more relevant
than the ID however is the time when this token expires.
Of course the not so optimal solution is to set item expires in and store res data expires in, now why
is this not so optimal?
Well because here, this of course is a value in seconds, 3000 seconds for example,
well that's also going to be 3000 seconds whenever we retrieve it,
so we should store the date when the token becomes invalid, not the amount of seconds.
So let's calculate this date, for this I'll add a new constant in my sign up action here, I'll name it now
and I can use new date without arguments in the constructor to get the current date.
Now I'll create a second constant, expiration date and that is now plus res data expiresIn,
however dates are measured in milliseconds, so on the now date, I can call get time, this method, a built
in javascript method to convert this into milliseconds,
so from the starting point of time basically to today in milliseconds.
And I also need to convert this in milliseconds which I can do by multiplying it with 1000.
Now I got one big number here, in milliseconds,
I need to convert this back into a date which I do with new date and if I do pass an argument to it,
in this case this big millisecond number, this gets converted to a date based on that argument.
So now I can store the expiration date here in the local storage and I can copy all the logic here
and execute the same code in login,
so there where I also dispatch auth user and so on,
I can also store my token here. Now with that, let me save all of that and
let's see if it works.
I will login here
and then we can access application under the chrome developer tools and there we get this local storage
item,
if we expand this, we should see our URL, the local URL, if we click on this, we see the items we got
in the local storage.
You may ignore the log level which is coming from our development set up but the token is interesting,
this is our ID token and expiresIn
is interesting,
let's see if this is correct, yeah if I check my watch, this is the correct expiration date,
it's one hour from now.
So with that, we're storing this data in local storage, a huge first step,
now of course we also need to extract it at some point of time to automatically log the user in.
Now this point of time probably is at application start up,
so maybe in the app.vue file, our route component, here
we could add a created method using this created lifecycle hook to automatically check if the user is
logged in
when this app starts. For this I'll add a new action in my store and I'll name it
or maybe place it below the normal login, I'll name it tryAutoLogin,
you can of course choose any name you want.
Now in tryAutoLogin,
I want to guess what?
See if I have a valid token in local storage, so first of all I'll extract the token, I'll get the token from
local storage
via the get item method, there I will retrieve the token.
Now if we have no token here, so if token is null or false, I will just return,
there is no value in continuing because we get no token, we can't login,
no matter if the token would have been valid or not,
that's the first check. The second check now is to see if we got a token, if it's still valid,
so now I get the expiration date,
I do this by accessing local storage, get item and then access expiresIn, well
I should also rename this to expiration date in both sign in and sign up,
makes more sense.
So expiration date is the key name, I should know also extract this here and get my expiration date here
stored in this constant and now I need to check if that's still valid.
So I'll again get now with new date and I will actually now check if that is greater than my expiration date,
I can check if now is smaller or equal which then essentially also means it's not valid anymore because
in one additional millisecond, it would be invalid.
So if it's smaller or equal than expiration date then we know it's an invalid token, it expired,
so then I will also return. If we make it through that check
however, we know that we do have a valid token because the expiration date is in the future,
excuse me therefore here we should check if now is great or greater or equal of course, so greater
or equal means now is in the, now is after the expiration date so it's invalid, if the expiration date
is in the future though,
so if the expiration date is greater than now, then we know we have a valid token,
so then I want to login. For that,
I will simply commit, I want to commit my auth user mutation and that requires user data which contains the
user ID too,
so we'll also need to store that in local storage, so I'll quickly do that in the sign up method, I'll also store
user ID in local storage by extracting local ID from the response data
and I will do the same in login, also store the user ID here. With that, I need to extract the user
id in my tryAutoLogin action, user ID is extracted from local storage with get item user ID and then
I can commit this mutation from up here, auth user where I pass the token and the user ID.
So there, I will commit auth user and pass on a javascript object which should have a token because
I retrieve a token here and the user ID,
so it should have a token which is equal to my token constant here
and which should have this user ID field which is equal to my user ID constant here,
so now we have some auto login functionality.
Let's see if that works,
we actually do have a valid token stored
but I will for now clear the storage here in
the developer tools to get rid of it, so that it's empty to
try this from scratch because we didn't store the user ID earlier.
So now let me login,
we got the data
and now let me reload the page.
Obviously, we're not logged in because we got our tryAutoLogin action but we're never executing it,
so let's now go to the app.vue file in created which we already prepared
and there I want to execute this store dispatch and dispatch this new tryAutoLogin action.
With that, we got valid data here stored in our local host,
so let me simply reload this page and you see we got the logout and dashboard button,
so we got valid data,
we got our successful auto login. Now
one problem we'll have though is if we logout, we don't clear our local storage,
so that's the last thing I want to do here. In store.js, in the logout action,
I also want to reach out to local storage and now we can call remove item for all these items or clear
if we want to clear the entire storage,
now this would be OK here but
let's assume we have different items stored in storage and we don't want to get rid of all of them.
So I will call remove item and get rid of the expiration date as well as get rid of the token and
the user id, so all the fields we store here, let's get rid of all of them, let's make sure expiration date
is spelled correctly.
Now if we go back to the application, if I click logout, you see the local storage is cleared here on the
right.
And with that, we got a working auto login functionality and
now if I reload, we're also not logged in because we got no valid login data, if I login here however and then
reload, we got data,
it works, if I logout,
it's gone.
And the same works for signing up too, there
if I do sign up, we also store the data here which I'll also persists across refreshes.
So that is auto logout and auto login here implemented.